---
title: "Aji tales"
date: 2023-03-02
slug: aji-tales
---

There is but one thread that connects me to my maternal grandmother who passed
away on a confusing, no-time-to-brood day at the peak of the second Covid wave
in India in 2021. We do not know what really killed her – pneumonia induced by
severe downfall in Hemoglobin levels or possible-Covid – but death descended on
her amidst a flurry of strenuous running-around to get her medical care. Around
2am that night, the family having decided to let her pass away instead of
putting her through a protracted misery of sickness and treatments to
lymphocitic leukamia, my mom woke me up to let me know that _aji_, on whom I had
affixed the oxygen mask from the concentrator just a few hours ago, had passed
away. She lay motionless, somewhat awkwardly, with her right arm across her
neck, her bony elbow propping up, one of her legs bent, on the steel cot that my
brother and I had assembled with some help from my father… the same cot on which
I had lied next to her, watching old Tamil movie clips, or _pattimandram_
speeches with her, not knowing when it was her turn to leave us all.

I’ve always nurtured this idea that _aji_ was more fond of my other two cousins
than I. That they got to spend almost all of their growing-up years with _aji_
around them, almost being a second-mom to my brother and often being the
first-mom to my sister, helped cement this notion in me. I’d only get to
interact with her during the summer holidays when my mom would take me to the
grandparents’ place, or when the gramps visited us. And in those days, there was
a side of _aji_ that remained, in my knowledge, completely hidden. It took my
brother’s coming-of-age (and his prodding) for her to reveal that she had an
outrageously smart, witty side to her and once that happened, there was no
stopping her, even during the times she was in the ICU, fresh out of a
near-death experience when the first sign of leukamia started rearing its head.

Sometime by then, we were all grown-ups and there was no causticity to the
feeling of being the grandson she had spent the least amount of time with. As
dire the situation was – she had to come stay with us because, at the time, only
mom had the time to take care of her – the silver-lining to it (for me,
personally) was that now this merchant-of-unexpected-wit would be living with
us. Living with me. Just a handful of years before this was when I found in
_aji_ the perfect person I could talk excitedly about old Tamil songs, their
nuances, their composers, their tales and more (besides my school friends R and
S). It didn’t strike me then as to why it was such a glorious moment but
retrospectively, it’s because I could finally, _finally_ connect with _aji_ in a
way that was exclusively mine. While _aji_ was a great aficionado of the songs
themselves for the lyrics (and the lyricists), I went after the music and the
arrangement and the history. She’d often quip, in response to me asking and then
telling her that such-and-such song was composed by such-and-such person
(usually MSV), that back in her day, she hardly paid any attention to who the
composer was and all they cared about was the actors onscreen and the people who
penned the lyrics. I felt proud (vain, I know) that I _knew_ more about a song
that came out when _aji_ was in her prime than _aji_ did.

I eventually discovered great acting (and greater dialog) in comedy scenes of
old Tamil movies and, soon enough, these became a topic of conversation as well.
_Aji_ had a bad back that prevented her from sitting for more than a few minutes
so she had to often lie down. You could try a lot of things to keep her
entertained but there’s only so much that could be done with the vagaries of a
daily life lived as a middle-class, salaried household. Everyone of us tried
ways to help her while away the time as she lay on her steel cot. Mine was to
lie next to her, open up YouTube on my phone, clip in the earphones – one in my
ear and the other in hers – and watch, with her, a Nagesh-Balaiah scene, or a
Chandrababu one, or a Cho-Nagesh one (the options were endless, really). I’d
often pretend that I was doing it because _I_ was bored and that I just wanted
to lie down and watch something and only plugged in and shared the earphone for
courtesy but now that I think of it, I wonder if she was clued in to the
pretense all along.

For many months after her passing, I avoided anything black-and-white like the
plague – no old Tamil songs, no old Tamil movie clips, and sometimes not even
anything that goes back to the 60s and 70s of the Tamil silverscreen era. But it
had to give eventually and so I weaved my way back through contemporary artists
talking about those days, few stray clips thrown in for emphasis and
exemplification. At long last, I could watch everything again but always ending
with the absolutely crushing emptiness of not having _aji_ to talk, discuss, or
share with.

I was never as close to my _aji_ as my other cousins were, in all my life. But
that one thread was plentiful enough to quench an inexplicable want to connect
with her.
