---
title: "Amruta Subash"
date: 2017-10-20
slug: amruta-subash
---

A few weeks ago, I watched _Astu_, a Marathi movie about an aging father
afflicted with dementia and his family that tries to cope up with it.

The father disappears — that’s where the plot begins — and while we go through
the journeys of both this man and his daughter as she tries to find him, the
father ends up tagging along a poor, bewildered man with an elephant (it’s
India; we have people who make their living entirely through their elephants
that are used in temples, in shows, in processions etc).

After more than seventy-percent through the movie, Amruta Subhash enters the
scene. She plays the wife of the man with the elephant. And while the man is
eager (while being respectful) to get rid of this strange man who has been
tagging along, Amruta’s character pities on this man and vows to take care of
him (after the initial knee-jerk reaction of getting him to the cops).

She has so little screen time but of all the people in the movie — excluding the
father (played by the venerable Mohan Agashe) — hers is the character that shook
my core being.

There are very few things more beautiful than watching Amruta don a character in
a good movie. Fortunately for me, I’ve seen her in some of the best Marathi
movies I’ve ever watched. First in _Shwaas_, then in _Vihir_ (when I was in the
Girish Kulkarni phase), then in _Valu_ and _Firaaq_. Not to forget her tiny but
memorable role in _Raman Raghav 2.0_.

Kannada, as she is spoken here in Bangalore, often sounds tough to me. But there
are those rare moments when a group of Kannadigas from the countryside board the
bus I’m in and then a sing-song, melody flows out of them. This is the rural
Kannada infused with so much mellow that it almost feels poetic right off the
bat.

In _Astu_, the role Amruta plays is that of someone from a very rural village
bordering Karnataka and Maharashtra. And boy does she speak that dialect. In
fact, not just that. She has sung a couple of songs too (in Kannada) for this
movie.

What better way to end than to know that she won the a National Award (for Best
Supporting Actress) for her role.
