---
title: "Coder’s block"
date: 2020-12-17
slug: coders-block
---

In a recent conversation, I made a comment that came out of me unconsciously. Or
so I’d like to believe because it almost certainly was not a well-thought-out
remark.

I said, “I dont want to think when I’m writing code”. It has been more than a
day since I said it and I’ve been thinking about this remark all throughout. Why
did I say it? What did I really mean? etc.

When I think as I write code, the whole process of writing some logic and making
it work feels tedious. Almost like drudgery. Things go wrong in oh-so-many ways
and it’s more like fighting against a machine with an almost unconquerable will
than writing logical instructions to a machine that is ready to do your bidding.

The opposite of this is when I _know_ what needs to be written and I just write
it. Sure, it breaks in a few ways but these are tiny annoyances that are
remedied almost immediately - or with a slight pause - and then the
almost-smooth-sailing resumes.

So the trick (to happier code-writing experiences) seems to be to _know_ in
advance what’s going to be written. This completely avoids the “thinking while
writing code” problem and - perhaps, as a result of that - gives a great
code-writing experience.

But of course, I’m no genius so I can’t really know what I’m going to write.
There’s always a trial and error even when I’m fairly confident of the kind of
logic I’m going to implement for a specific feature/problem. But fighting
through that trial and error is easier than doing that _thinking_ while also
writing code.

I didn’t know it at the time and only realized it now while thinking about this
that I had the same problem with writing (in general). If I had spent my days
marinating in thoughts about something and, more importantly, forming the
structure of the thing I’m thinking about, my writing on that would almost
_flow_. If instead I fired up the editor with just the crux of a topic, I could
go weeks with nothing to show except feeling battered. The coder’s block is the
same as the writer’s block.

These lessons always sound blatantly obvious in hindsight. These are lessons
we’ve read about, heard about, seen about in various forms. Visualizing the
thing you are about to produce gives you a fair upper-hand in skirting the
problem of a writer’s, coder’s and creator’s block.

I am pretty certain I’d forget this lesson four weeks down the line and stare at
stray pieces of code I’m completely unhappy about unless I re-read this multiple
times a month. But there is one interesting meta-application here: I spent a
better part of the day thinking about this whole write-up as well and that has
paid dividends.
