---
title: "Notes from the Marina"
date: 2023-07-08
slug: notes-from-the-marina
---

It has been a long time since I dipped my feet into the cool morning waters of
Chennai's Marina beach despite now living here full-time. So I went at the crack
of dawn on a cloudy Saturday morning neither too warm nor too cold. One of those
impromptu decisions.

Almost at last minute, I thought to myself, I could probably finish reading
Hemingway's _A Farewell to Arms_ at the beach (I know, poor choice of a novel to
finish at the beach but I didn't know better at the time).

There's always so much to see at the beach. A few boys and men were sleeping on
mats strewn right next to what probably was their own cart shops. The morning
breeze swooping in from the sea must be so soothing. One young lad was almost
hugging another. Hard to write about this without some (or a lot of) people
thinking "gay". The mind also went back to the one time my brother hugged me
tight while we were asleep as kids way back in the day; he doesn't do that ever
but this one time, in the middle of the night as we lay on a couple of mats on
the floor, I moved the chair next to my head and it made the noise chairs make
when you push them across the floor, and that spooked and scared him so deeply
he turned and hugged me tight, almost choking my neck, and asked very feebly,
"What was that?"

There were those that had made the beach their home; and then there were others
who came to the beach from posh areas in cars only affluence could afford and I
thought what a melting pot equalizer the beach is in some ways. And then in the
distance, while Hemingway droned on about Catherine (yes, I said "droned on"), a
man in a white _veshti_ and chequered shirt, a _naamam_ on his forehead â€“ and
suddenly, I started seeing people's faces and guessing which broad community
they could be from. Some obvious, like the one with the _naamam_. Some less so
but placeable to a reasonable degree: like a _chettiyaar_ family. Some
impossible to tell. I hoped my face was one of those. Impossible to tell. So, in
some more ways, the beach was a melting pot equalizer. It sprayed mist on
everyone, wetted everyone's feet just the same.

The beach, like a park, could trigger a heightened sense of loneliness if you
weren't careful enough with your thoughts. Lots of couples come here to be
happy. Mostly heterosexual ones. I wish the times were such that no one cared
about the type of sexuality of the couples being written about. A case rages at
the apex court that is trying to decide how the law sees couples of
non-heterosexual nature. "I believe they have a cause, but not a case" my ass,
respectfully. They have a cause, they have a case and they have a right too is
what it is. Anyway, digressions. If you feel lonely, if your thoughts are
besotted with the notion of finding (or not finding) that "special someone", it
can be hard to take in the views. But it's also a reminder that what you have
had so far, this beautiful life, has been a quite good and fortunate. Such
privilege of moderate wealth, great upbringing, access to immense knowledge,
enriching friendships, literacy and, not to forget, enough self-awareness.

Suddenly, a ghost crab popped out of its hole. I thought it was big. And then
another, this time a smaller one. And another. And soon, I realized I was
sitting atop a large area of sand peppered with holes all over the place. Smack
on top of crab bunkers. Lots of tiny ones going about their day, always wary of
the faintest movement their antenna-like eyes could detect. This one tiny thing
was shuffling through microscopic sand with its tiny claws and feeding its mouth
at intervals. Not half a meter away, out popped another: this one the biggest of
them all. It threw out a bunch of sand and paused one brief second before
disappearing into its hole. Weekend cleaning, I suspect.

The cloudy day refused to melt away into bright skies so the orange sun couldn't
really shine. Far away to the left, the port was damn near invisible because of
all the mist. As the day progressed, more of the beach got wrapped in the sea
mist and it made the beach cooler. People left, only to be replaced with more
new people. One or two cart shops opened. Someone was trying to shoot at the
balloons. _A Farewell to Arms_ ended (on the saddest of notes possible). And
then, I left.
