---
title: "Prativaadi Bhayankara Sreenivos"
slug: prativaadi-bhayankara-srinivas
date: 2013-04-15
---

When he stepped out of the white Ambassador on a decidedly harsh and sunny late
morning, the first words he spoke were, "simmering summer."

The alliteration was lost on me then but the dozen or so pens in his pocket - a
seemingly unnecessary load for a fragile man like him - caught my attention. He
inched his way onto the dais amidst the usual applause he must have gotten
widely used to by then.

It was 2003 and I'm quite forgetful of time counted in months or days. I was in
Std IX and a violinist of the school - or truth be told, the only guy who
decided to boast his violin skills - petty and less-than-average as they were
and continue to be - to the school which, in its usually aura of encouragement,
allowed us to bask in a greater glory. _Kendriya Vidyala_ (I think the Anna
Nagar branch but again, I'm not sure of this) was hosting a _Sangathan_
communion related to music and on the inaugural day P.B.Sreenivas was the guest
of honor.

For a lad of fourteen years, a collaborative stage performance with his
genuinely-talented flautist classmate, Sharad, must be followed by a general
chatter with the other instrumentalists from the band that performed on that
day. One cannot really expect a student - much less a secondary school student -
to listen in rapt attention to the stories of an old man who appeared to be -
with much respect to the legend - in the darkening dusk of his lifetime already.

P.B.S would continue to live a decade before news of his death would reach me on
an uncomfortable late evening; fatefully, I was playing the violin when dear
mother's call announced his demise.

However, on that particular afternoon, about four/five rows behind the first,
hands folded in an unconscious surrender, ears oblivious to any possible ruckus
in my neighborhood, eyes transfixed on the wrinkled face and the large
spectacles and the larger turban and the traditional forehead smear of kumkum
(kungumam), I was listening to a legend pick pages from his life and recount
them.

Under the shamiana, a subtly disturbing warm draft was forgotten when he sang
the first verse of _Kaalangalil Aval Vasantham_. The intricacies within the tune
were lost to time and age but it stilled me in that conclave of prattling music
teachers and a few other participants. My ears were, in those glorious old days,
drawing nectar from old melodies of the bygone era: Viswanathan-Ramamurthy's
compositions rendered soulfully by the likes of P.B.S, T.M.S and the
then-young-and-honey-throated S.P.B.

Since that episode, I began learning a little more about P.B.S. To this day, I
have no clue as to how a man could dabble in poetry as varied in language as
genre. At times, his artistic prowess appears superhuman and purely magical.

His renditions for the _Thamizh_ acting legend Gemini Ganesan are well-known. My
mom, my grandma and I would watch the telly as the melodious voice of Sreenivas
was broadcast, now crooning _Kaalangalil Aval Vasantham_, then singing
_Mayakkama Kalakkama_ and then a little later, instilling strength through
_Manidhan Enbavan_.

I remember how, on one lazy morning of bunked classes, I had to seek the support
of my grandmother - whose knowledge and understanding of old songs supersedes
that of my mother - to prove that although PBS sang more songs for Gemini than
others, the befitting voice that could almost disguise itself as Ganesan's was
that of A M Raja and not Sreenivas.

Now that I look around, PBS is almost everywhere. In some of my most favorite
songs. In some of my most favorite people. In some of my most cherished
memories.

To this day, one particular phrase keeps me afloat amidst tumultuous times:
_unakkum keezhe, iruppavar kodi, ninaithu paarthu, nimmadhi naadu_. For folks
that have little or no outlet to share the innards of their souls, this is but
one line that pacifies an otherwise perennially solitary and occasionally
anxious livelihood.

That _Indha Mandrathil Odi Varum_ from _Policekaaran Magazh_ has the ability to
load my eyes with water - it's not often that a cherished relationship meets a
fate as melancholy as the movie itself.

The turban has a human residence no more. The dozen or so pens would no longer
protrude almost as if they were about to tumble out of his pocket.

And yet, a mildly-inebriating _Nilavukku En Mel_ would continue to mesmerize
this writer.

Thank you, sir.
